[blog] Building Agent Harness for OTel Instrumentation with GenAI Semantic Conventions and Weaver (#11381)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2026/agent-harness-genai-instrumentation/index.md

as a target spec rather than a suggestion. Put those two things together with a
tool that can mechanically check the output, and instrumentation becomes a
closed-loop generation problem rather than an open-ended writing task.

## The pieces

The system rests on two OpenTelemetry components, plus an orchestration layer.

The **GenAI semantic conventions** define the contract: span names, attribute
names, units, and which fields carry the model, the tokens, the messages, and
the tool calls. They are the ground truth that every generated plugin must
match.

**Weaver** is the validator. We rely on its
[live-check](https://github.com/open-telemetry/weaver/tree/v0.25.1/crates/weaver_live_check)
capability, which starts an OTLP listener, streams the telemetry emitted by a
running instrumentation through a set of _advisors_, and compares it against the
resolved semantic-convention registry. Built-in advisors cover the fundamentals
(`missing_attribute`, `type_mismatch`); the default OTel Rego policies add
naming and formatting rules, and you can supply your own with
`--advice-policies`. Every finding carries a level — `violation`, `improvement`,

> or `information` — and Weaver exits non-zero when the report contains a

Reviewer: Minor, but the exit code is load-bearing for the whole post, so worth being precise: non-zero on violation is the default of `--fail-on violation`. The threshold is configurable (`improvement` / `information` / `none`), and `--no-stats` disables enforcement entirely. Suggest "by default (`--fail-on violation`)".

violation.

The **orchestration layer** turns an instrumentation request into a scheduled
run and posts the resulting pull request back to the requester. We currently run
this on a self-hosted multi-agent task platform, but nothing in the design

> depends on it: any orchestrator that can check out a repository, run a team of
> agents against it, and open a pull request will do. What matters is the loop

Reviewer: nit, tiny readability improvement

```suggestion
depends on it: any orchestrator will do, as long as it can check out a repository, run a team of agents against it, and open a pull request. What matters is the loop
```

- **Instrumentation Research Agent** — clones the target framework, studies its
  architecture and extension points, surveys existing implementations, and
  produces a research report listing candidate instrumentation strategies.
- **Plan Review Agent** — scores the candidates on complexity, maintainability,
  and coverage, picks the best one, and writes a fine-grained
  `execution-plan.md` specifying which methods to wrap and where each attribute
  should come from. This is essentially a spec-generation step, and it is the
  natural point for a human to review.
- **Coding Agent** — implements `execution-plan.md` against the GenAI semantic
  conventions, using the shared GenAI utilities.
- **Code Review & Test Validation Agent** — reviews the generated code, writes
  unit tests, and ping-pongs with the Coding Agent until reviews are addressed
  and tests pass.
- **E2E Generation & Deployment Agent** — runs in parallel with coding,
  preparing the integration-test harness so it is ready when the plugin is.
- **Observation Agent** — runs the harness in Kubernetes, captures OTLP output,
  hands it to Weaver for semantic validation, and watches the workload over time

>   for memory leaks and other runtime regressions.

Reviewer: nice!!

When the plugin is ready, we package the framework's own examples into container
images, inject the new instrumentation, and deploy the whole thing into a test
Kubernetes cluster. The running demos produce telemetry, which we pull through
OTLP and feed into Weaver. If Weaver reports a violation — a missing attribute,
a type mismatch, an off-spec name — control returns to the Coding Agent for a
fix and the pipeline re-runs. Once validation passes, we let the workload soak
so we can catch issues that only appear with time, such as memory leaks.
Anything that looks wrong goes back to the Coding Agent together with the
metrics that triggered it.

Because the whole thing is agentic, you can interrupt the Team Lead at any point
— to skip a step, to roll back, or to override the plan — without rewriting a
workflow definition.

## What the generated instrumentation looks like

Two design choices keep the generated code from drifting, and both of them are
constraints on the Coding Agent rather than instructions in a prompt.

The first is that `execution-plan.md` fixes the hook set before any code is
written. In the generated CrewAI plugin, that plan shows up as an explicit,

> reviewable list of wrap targets:

Reviewer: Curious: do you prompt agent to do wrapping or ask it to explore how to instrument? in some cases instrumentations provide other extensibility points (like callbacks in langchain) that also work better with the context, while methods to wrap could be less convenient / internal / be executed in wrong context, etc.

```python
_CREWAI_UNINSTRUMENT_TARGETS = (
    ("crewai.crew", "Crew", "kickoff"),
    ("crewai.crew", "Crew", "kickoff_async"),
    ("crewai.flow.flow", "Flow", "kickoff"),
    ("crewai.flow.flow", "Flow", "kickoff_async"),
    ("crewai.agent", "Agent", "execute_task"),
    ("crewai.task", "Task", "execute_sync"),
    ("crewai.tools.tool_usage", "ToolUsage", "_use"),
)
```

A human reviewing the pull request can check that list against the framework's
own API surface without reading the whole diff — which is exactly the review
step we want humans spending time on.

The second is that the agents do not hand-write attribute names. Instead they
map framework objects onto the typed invocation objects from

> [`opentelemetry-util-genai`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python-contrib/tree/v0.65b0/util/opentelemetry-util-genai),

Reviewer: please change to the python-genai repo, this code has moved

and let that shared layer emit the spans, metrics, and events:

```python

> return InvokeAgentInvocation(

Reviewer: I think this is called `AgentInvocation` in the new repo and has different API

    provider=CREWAI_PROVIDER,
    agent_id=_agent_id(agent),
    agent_name=role,
    agent_description=goal if capture_content else None,
    request_model=_agent_model(agent),
    response_model_name=_agent_model(agent),
    input_messages=(
        [InputMessage(role="user", parts=input_parts)] if input_parts else []
    ),
    system_instruction=(
        _message_parts(backstory) if capture_content else None
    ),
    ...
)
```

This matters more than it looks. An agent asked to "set the right GenAI
attributes" will invent attribute names that read plausibly and fail
conformance. An agent asked to populate `InvokeAgentInvocation` can only get the
_mapping_ wrong, not the _schema_ — and a wrong mapping is something Weaver can
see. Content capture stays behind the standard opt-in, so prompts and
completions are only recorded when the operator asks for them.

That shared layer is the GenAI utility package from OpenTelemetry Python Contrib
plus our own extensions, maintained as an open, deliberately additive fork at
[alibaba/loongsuite-python](https://github.com/alibaba/loongsuite-python). When
these plugins were written, upstream covered the single model call, so the

> agent, tool, retrieval and memory types — `InvokeAgentInvocation` among them —

Reviewer: I see now. Would it make sense to use OTel util-genai code sample here? so that OTel users who want to instrument would start with the code they'd need to write?

conformance directories, run as a gate:

```sh
otel-conformance scenarios/gen-ai/python/crewai/loongsuite-crewai
```

One line, because everything that decides what "conforming" means is declared in
the directory rather than passed on the command line. Its `conformance.yaml`
names the wrapper it wants:

```yaml
runner: genai-conformance
instrumented_library: crewai
instrumentation_library: loongsuite-instrumentation-crewai
```

That one key is where the semantic-convention registry pin and the advice
policies come from, which is the property we care about: the pin travels with
the conventions and the scenario, not with whoever typed the command. A run that
passed last week and fails today failed because the instrumentation changed, not
because someone resolved a different registry.

Each scenario then runs under its own live-check, and a violation fails the run.
That is the default; `--report-only` is the opt-out, and it downgrades semantic
findings to warnings while still failing on a scenario that crashed or produced
nothing to measure.

Each sample entity comes back augmented with findings:

```json
{
  "live_check_result": {
    "all_advice": [
      {

>         "type": "PolicyFinding",

Reviewer: `"type": "PolicyFinding"` isn't a field Weaver emits. In v0.25.1 `schemas/policy.finding.json` sets `additionalProperties: false` with exactly `id`, `message`, `level`, `context`, `signal_name`, `signal_type`. Readers who match on this field will be surprised - please drop it (the rest of the sample checks out).

        "level": "violation",
        "signal_type": "span",
        "signal_name": "execute_tool ping"
      }
    ],
    "highest_advice_level": "violation"
  }
}
```

That finding is worth reading closely, because nobody on our side wrote the rule
it came from. "An instrumentation must not set span status to OK" is one of the
domain-agnostic advice policies the runner ships, and the Coding Agent tripped
over it on a tool span. The exit code is the load-bearing part: it turns "does
this telemetry conform?" into something the loop can branch on, which is the
only reason the loop has a termination condition at all. Without it, we were
asking one model to grade another model's telemetry — a loop that always
converges, but not on correctness.

The same runner produces the other artifact we rely on. To see how much of the
GenAI spec a generated plugin actually covers, we use the
[semantic-conventions-conformance](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions-conformance)
project, whose reduction step turns a run into a coverage matrix: which

> conventions a plugin satisfies, which it misses, and which it emits but

Reviewer: "which it emits but shouldn't" isn't something the coverage matrix can show. The matrix has only registry-defined columns, and the next paragraph says coverage is scored only over registry-defined attributes.

shouldn't. Coverage is measurement rather than gating, so those runs are the
`--report-only` kind — a missing attribute is recorded, not a build break.

> ![Coverage matrix for invoke-agent internal spans across fourteen generated instrumentations, with the GenAI attributes grouped by requirement level: required, conditionally required, recommended, and opt-in](invoke-agent-internal-spans.png)

Reviewer: Nit: the matrix rows and this section don't line up for the reader. AlgoTune, CLAW-Eval, Hermes Agent, OpenHands, qwenpaw, Terminus2 and Vita appear in the figure but are never mentioned in the post, while LangChain, LiteLLM, AutoGen, AgentScope, Dify, Google ADK, Microsoft Agent Framework, MCP and mem0 are listed as shipped but absent from the figure. A sentence saying the matrix covers only plugins that emit invoke-agent internal spans would close the gap.

The matrix is also how we notice the _opposite_ failure: attributes an agent
emitted that the registry does not define. We do not suppress those findings.
Accepting one means declaring it in `expected_violations` with its finding `id`
and a written reason — and because a declared violation that Weaver stops
reporting also fails the run, a suppression cannot quietly outlive the gap that

> justified it. Coverage is scored only over registry-defined attributes, so an

Reviewer: > and because a declared violation that Weaver stops
reporting also fails the run, a suppression cannot quietly outlive the gap that
justified it. Coverage is scored only over registry-defined attributes, so an

I don't understand this sentence

extension can never inflate a plugin's number. Extensions that recur across

> frameworks become candidates for upstream semconv proposals.

Reviewer: this also sounds very AI - I don't think I understand this sentence.

One of those extensions is a known deviation rather than a considered choice.
The CrewAI plugin currently emits its framework-specific attributes under
`gen_ai.crewai.*`, and the
[attribute naming guidance](/docs/specs/semconv/general/naming/) advises against
exactly that: reusing an existing OpenTelemetry namespace as the prefix for a
company- or framework-specific attribute risks a clash if OpenTelemetry later
uses the same name for something else. We would rather raise it than quietly
rename it, because the question underneath it is general — where should
framework-specific GenAI signals live, so that a reader can tell at a glance
which attributes are spec and which are ours? That is a question for the SIG,

> and it is one our own generated plugins keep running into.

Reviewer: This is very AI - is there a way to collapse it into one sentence for mere mortals?

## What we've shipped so far

We have used this system to drive end-to-end instrumentation development for a
range of GenAI frameworks, agent SDKs, and agent benchmarks. The generated
plugins live in

> [`instrumentation-loongsuite`](https://github.com/alibaba/loongsuite-python) in

Reviewer: `alibaba/loongsuite-python` is linked three times under three different names (`alibaba/loongsuite-python` at the util-genai fork paragraph, `instrumentation-loongsuite` here, `Loongsuite Python` in the closing CTA), and the `instrumentation-loongsuite` link text points at the repo root rather than that package. Repo convention is to link on first mention only.

Related: the contribution guidance asks blog posts to stay vendor-neutral. The technical content generalizes well, so consider keeping one link and pointing the closing CTA at semconv and opentelemetry-python-genai instead.

review sits at the plan stage and not only at the pull request.

## What's next

Two things are clear from the runs so far.

The first is that **spec quality matters more than model quality**. The sharper
the GenAI semantic conventions get, the less the agents argue with each other
about edge cases, and the cleaner the resulting telemetry is. Every ambiguity in
the spec becomes a place where two agents can both be defensibly right and the
loop stalls.

Concretely: the conventions that generate the fewest disagreements are the ones
whose value has exactly one possible source — `gen_ai.tool.name` and
`gen_ai.tool.call.id` map one-to-one from the tool-call object, and
`gen_ai.usage.input_tokens` / `gen_ai.usage.output_tokens` are typed integers
the provider reports directly. The ones that generate the most are where the
spec names an intent and leaves the mapping to the author: which of a
framework's concepts counts as an `invoke_agent` operation (CrewAI alone has
crews, tasks, agents and flows to map onto it), and whether an agent invocation
is a `client` or an `internal` span — our own coverage matrix has plugins

> landing on both sides of that choice.

Reviewer: This isn't a spec ambiguity, and it undercuts the section's argument. `gen-ai-agent-spans.md` defines two distinct spans: `gen_ai.invoke_agent.client` ("GenAI agent invocation over a remote service", examples OpenAI Assistants / Bedrock Agents, span kind SHOULD be CLIENT) and `gen_ai.invoke_agent.internal` ("within the same process", examples explicitly "LangChain agents, CrewAI agents", span kind SHOULD be INTERNAL). Plugins landing on both sides is a conformance bug in the plugins, not a place where two authors can be defensibly right.

It's also contradicted by the figure it cites: the coverage matrix above is titled "Invoke Agent Internal Spans" and all 14 rows are internal, so it can't show plugins on both sides.

Suggest dropping this example. The CrewAI crews/tasks/agents/flows one immediately before it is a genuine mapping ambiguity and carries the point on its own.

The second is that **the mechanical conformance check is load-bearing**. Without
it, the loop has no termination condition and the agents drift toward telemetry

> that looks right.

Reviewer: can you please replace load-bearing and drift with some words that were not compromised by AI?

If you maintain a GenAI framework and would like instrumentation written this
way, or if you'd like to help improve the semantic conventions that drive it:

- File an issue on the

>   [semantic conventions repository](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions)

Reviewer: SemConv GenAI repo probably?

  if you spot a gap our agents are likely to hit.
- Join the
  [GenAI Semantic Conventions and Instrumentation SIG](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/blob/8b6c5060617ced1caf4c39ff5b7318aa2e9c7569/projects/gen-ai.md)
  discussions to help shape what gets standardized next.
- Try the generated plugins in
  [Loongsuite Python](https://github.com/alibaba/loongsuite-python) and tell us

>   where they fall short.

Reviewer: I feel a bit conflicted about this - we're trying to unify around OTel instrumentations, but point to Loongsuite that are also subject to donation to otel
